Like type 2 diabetes, prediabetes occurs when your body does not process insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that the pancreas releases to help regulate the amount of sugar in your blood. 

There are certain factors that can put you at higher risk for prediabetes, such as: 

WEIGHT
This is the main risk factor for diabetes. Your Body Mass Index (BMI) tells you whether you are underweight, overweight, or healthy by comparing your height and weight. A BMI in the overweight or obese category puts you at greater risk for diabetes.

WAIST SIZE
A larger waist can also make it difficult for cells to absorb insulin. Men with waists larger than 40 inches and women with waists larger than 35 inches are at higher risk for prediabetes. In particular, the more fat you carry around the abdomen, the more trouble your cells have processing insulin. 

DIET
Eating high amounts of refined carbohydrates, like white bread and pasta, can spike your blood sugar. An unhealthy diet can also cause you to gain more fat, which contributes to insulin resistance. 

SEDENTARY LIFESTYLE
Exercise is an important way of controlling weight and increasing insulin sensitivity. The more sedentary you are, the higher your chances of getting prediabetes.    
Age. Prediabetes can develop at any age, but the risk increases above age 45. According to the National Council for Aging Care, that's because older people have been eating for longer and are exposed to more sugar.

RACE 
African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Asian Americans, and Pacific Islanders are at higher risk than white Americans. While the exact reason for this is unknown, Justin B. Echouffo Tcheugui, MD, PhD, assistant professor at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, says this is partially caused by socioeconomic inequality, though genetics, standard diet, and access to medical care can all contribute.

FAMILY HISTORY
If you have a parent who developed type 2 diabetes before the age of 50, you have a 1 in 7 chance of getting it. Your risk is 1 in 13 if your parent was diagnosed after 50. Almost all type 2 diabetics started with prediabetes.

GESTATIONAL DIABETES
About 50% of women who experience diabetes while pregnant — a condition called gestational diabetes — will develop type 2 diabetes after pregnancy. If a mother with a history of gestational diabetes develops type 2, their child has a 2% to 4% chance of getting it later in life.